L 299/5-12      EN      Official Journal of the European Union      27.10.2012


       DIRECTIVE 2012/28/EU OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL
                               of 25 October 2012
                     on certain permitted uses of orphan works
                           (Text with EEA relevance)


THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION,                                                           
                                                                          
Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in
particular Articles 53(1), 62 and 114 thereof, 

Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission, 

After transmission of the draft legislative act to the national parliaments,                                                              

Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee
(1),                                                     

Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure (2),         

Whereas:                                                                  

(1) Publicly accessible libraries, educational establishments and museums, as
    well as archives, film or audio heritage institutions and public-service
    broadcasting organisations, established in the Member States, are engaged
    in large-scale digitisation of their collections or archives in order to
    create European Digital Libraries. They contribute to the preservation and
    dissemination of European cultural heritage, which is also important for
    the creation of European Digital Libraries, such as Europeana.
    Technologies for mass digitisation of print materials and for search and
    indexing enhance the research value of the libraries' collections.
    Creating large online libraries facilitates electronic search and
    discovery tools which open up new sources of discovery for researchers and
    academics who would otherwise have to content themselves with more
    traditional and analogue search methods.                                                  
                                                                          
(2) The need to promote free movement of knowledge and innovation in the
	internal market is an important component of the Europe 2020 Strategy, as
	set out in the Communication from the Commission entitled 'Europe 2020: A
	strategy for smart, sustainable and inclusive growth', which includes as
	one of its flagship initiatives the development of a Digital Agenda for
	Europe.                                                                   
                                                                          
(3) Creating a legal framework to facilitate the digitisation and
	dissemination of works and other subject-matter which are protected by
	copyright or related rights and for which no rightholder is identified or
	for which the rightholder, even if identified, is not located — so-called
	orphan works — is a key action of the Digital Agenda for Europe, as set
	out in the Communication from the Commission entitled 'A Digital Agenda
	for Europe'. This Directive targets the specific problem of the legal
	determination of orphan work status and its consequences in terms of the
	permitted users and permitted uses of works or phonograms considered to be
	orphan works.                                              
                                                                                          
(4) This Directive is without prejudice to specific solutions being developed
	in the Member States to address larger mass digitisation issues, such as
	in the case of so-called 'out-of-commerce' works. Such solutions take into
	account the specificities of different types of content and different
	users and build upon the consensus of the relevant stakeholders. This
	approach has also been followed in the Memorandum of Understanding on key
	principles on the digitisation and making available of out-of-commerce
	works, signed on 20 September 2011 by representatives of European
	libraries, authors, publishers and collecting societies and witnessed by
	the Commission. This Directive is without prejudice to that Memorandum of
	Understanding, which calls on Member States and the Commission to ensure
	that voluntary agreements concluded between users, rightholders and
	collective rights management organisations to licence the use of
	out-of-commerce works on the basis of the principles contained therein
	benefit from the requisite legal certainty in a national and cross-border
	context.
                                                                                          
(5) Copyright is the economic foundation for the creative industry, since it
	estimulates innovation, creation, investment and production. Mass
	digitisation and dissemination of works is therefore a means of protecting
	Europe's cultural heritage. Copyright is an important tool for ensuring
	that the creative sector is rewarded for its work.                                                                    
                                                                                          
(6) The rightholders' exclusive rights of reproduction of their works and
	other protected subject-matter and of making them available to the public,
	as harmonised under Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of
	the Council of 22 May 2001 on the harmonisation of certain aspects of
	copyright and related rights in the information society (3), necessitate
	the prior consent of rightholders to the digitisation and the making
	available to the public of a work or other protected subject-matter.                                
                                                                                          
(7) In the case of orphan works, it is not possible to obtain such prior
	consent to the carrying-out of acts of reproduction or of making available
	to the public.                                             
                                                                                          
(8) Different approaches in the Member States to the recognition of orphan
	work status can present obstacles to the functioning of the internal
	market and the use of, and cross-border access to, orphan works. Such
	different approaches can also result in restrictions on the free movement
	of goods and services which incorporate cultural content. Therefore,
	ensuring the mutual recognition of such status is appropriate, since it
	will allow access to orphan works in all Member States.

(9) In particular, a common approach to determining the orphan work status and
	the permitted uses of orphan works is necessary in order to ensure legal
	certainty in the internal market with respect to the use of orphan works
	by publicly accessible libraries, educational establishments and museums,
	as well as by archives, film or audio heritage institutions and
	public-service broadcasting organisations.

(10) Cinematographic or audiovisual works and phonograms in the archives of 
	 public-service broadcasting organisations and produced by them include
	 orphan works. Taking into account the special position of broadcasters as
	 producers of phonograms and audiovisual material and the need to adopt
	 measures to limit the phenomenon of orphan works in the future, it is
	 appropriate to set a cut-off date for the application of this Directive
	 to works and phonograms in the archives of broadcasting organisations.

(11) Cinematographic and audiovisual works and phonograms contained in the
	 archives of public-service broadcasting organisations and produced by
	 them, should for the purposes of this Directive be regarded as including
	 cinematographic and audiovisual works and phonograms which are
	 commissioned by such organisations for the exclusive exploitation by them
	 or other co-producing public-service broadcasting organisations.
	 Cinematographic and audiovisual works and phonograms contained in the
	 archives of public-service broadcasting organisations which have not been
	 produced or commissioned by such organisations, but which those
	 organisations have been authorised to use under a licensing agreement,
	 should not fall within the scope of this Directive.

(12) For reasons of international comity, this Directive should apply only to
	 works and phonograms that are first published in the territory of a
	 Member State or, in the absence of publication, first broadcast in the
	 territory of a Member State or, in the absence of publication or
	 broadcast, made publicly accessible by the beneficiaries of this
	 Directive with the consent of the rightholders. In the latter case, this
	 Directive should only apply provided that it is reasonable to assume that
	 the rightholders would not oppose the use allowed by this Directive.

(13) Before a work or phonogram can be considered an orphan work, a diligent
	 search for the rightholders in the work or phonogram, including
	 rightholders in works and other protected subject-matter that are
	 embedded or incorporated in the work or phonogram, should be carried out
	 in good faith. Member States should be permitted to provide that such
	 diligent search may be carried out by the organisations referred to in
	 this Directive or by other organisations. Such other organisations may
	 charge for the service of carrying out a diligent search.

(14) It is appropriate to provide for a harmonised approach concerning such
	 diligent search in order to ensure a high level of protection of
	 copyright and related rights in the Union. A diligent search should
	 involve the consultation of sources that supply information on the works
	 and other protected subject-matter as determined, in accordance with this
	 Directive, by the Member State where the diligent search has to be
	 carried out. In so doing, Member States could refer to the diligent
	 search guidelines agreed in the context of the High Level Working Group
	 on Digital Libraries established as part of the i2010 digital library
	 initiative.

(15) In order to avoid duplication of search efforts, a diligent search should
     be carried out in the Member State where the work or phonogram was first
	 published or, in cases where no publication has taken place, where it was
	 first broadcast. The diligent search in respect of cinematographic or
	 audiovisual works the producer of which has his headquarters or habitual
	 residence in a Member State should be carried out in that Member State.
	 In the case of cinematographic or audiovisual works which are co-produced
	 by producers established in different Member States, the diligent search
	 should be carried out in each of those Member States. With regard to
	 works and phonograms which have neither been published nor broadcast but
	 which have been made publicly accessible by the beneficiaries of this
	 Directive with the consent of the rightholders, the diligent search
	 should be carried out in the Member State where the organisation that
	 made the work or phonogram publicly accessible with the consent of the
	 rightholder is established. Diligent searches for the rightholders in
	 works and other protected subject-matter that are embedded or
	 incorporated in a work or phonogram should be carried out in the Member
	 State where the diligent search for the work or phonogram containing the
	 embedded or incorporated work or other protected subject-matter is
	 carried out. Sources of information available in other countries should
	 also be consulted if there is evidence to suggest that relevant
	 information on rightholders is to be found in those other countries. The
	 carrying-out of diligent searches may generate various kinds of
	 information, such as a search record and the result of the search. The
	 search record should be kept on file in order for the relevant
	 organisation to be able to substantiate that the search was diligent.

(16) Member States should ensure that the organisations concerned keep records
	 of their diligent searches and that the results of such searches,
	 consisting in particular of any finding that a work or phonogram is to be
	 considered an orphan work within the meaning of this Directive, as well
	 as information on the change of status and on the use which those
	 organisations make of orphan works, are collected and made available to
	 the public at large, in particular through the recording of the relevant
	 information in an online database. Considering in particular the
	 pan-European dimension, and in order to avoid duplication of efforts, it
	 is appropriate to make provision for the creation of a single online
	 database for the Union containing such information and for making it
	 available to the public at large in a transparent manner. This can enable
	 both the organisations which are carrying out diligent searches and the
	 rightholders easily to access such information. The database could also
	 play an important role in preventing and bringing to an end possible
	 copyright infringements, particularly in the case of changes to the
	 orphan work status of the works and phonograms. Under Regulation (EU) No
	 386/2012 (4), the Office for Harmonization in the Internal Market ('the
	 Office') is entrusted with certain tasks and activities, financed by
	 making use of its own budgetary means, aimed at facilitating and
	 supporting the activities of national authorities, the private sector and
	 the Union institutions in the fight against, including the prevention of,
	 infringement of intellectual property rights. 

	 In particular, pursuant to point (g) of Article 2(4) of that Regulation,
	 those tasks include providing mechanisms which help to improve the online
	 exchange of relevant information between the Member States' authorities
	 concerned and fostering cooperation between those auth­ orities. It is
	 therefore appropriate to rely on the Office to establish and manage the
	 European database containing information related to orphan works referred
	 to in this Directive.

(17) There can be several rightholders in respect of a particular work or
	 phonogram, and works and phonograms can themselves include other works or
	 protected subject-matter. This Directive should not affect the rights of
	 identified and located rightholders. If at least one rightholder has been
	 identified and located, a work or phonogram should not be considered an
	 orphan work. The beneficiaries of this Directive should only be permitted
	 to use a work or phonogram one or more of the rightholders in which are
	 not identified or not located, if they are authorised to carry out the
	 acts of reproduction and of making available to the public covered by
	 Articles 2 and 3 respectively of Directive 2001/29/EC by those
	 rightholders that have been identified and located, including the
	 rightholders of works and other protected subject-matter which are
	 embedded or incorporated in the works or phonograms. Rightholders that
	 have been identified and located can give this authorisation only in
	 relation to the rights that they themselves hold, either because the
	 rights are their own rights or because the rights were transferred to
	 them, and should not be able to authorise under this Directive any use on
	 behalf of rightholders that have not been identified and located.
	 Correspondingly, when previously non-identified or non-located
	 rightholders come forward in order to claim their rights in the work or
	 phonogram, the lawful use of the work or phonogram by the beneficiaries
	 can continue only if those rightholders give their authorisation to do so
	 under Directive 2001/29/EC in relation to the rights that they hold.

(18) Rightholders should be entitled to put an end to the orphan work status
	 in the event that they come forward to claim their rights in the work or
	 other protected subject-matter. Rightholders that put an end to the
	 orphan work status of a work or other protected subject-matter should
	 receive fair compensation for the use that has been made of their works
	 or other protected subject-matter under this Directive, to be determined
	 by the Member State where the organisation that uses an orphan work is
	 established. Member States should be free to determine the circumstances
	 under which the payment of such compensation may be organised, including
	 the point in time at which the payment is due. For the purposes of
	 determining the possible level of fair compensation, due account should
	 be taken, inter alia, of Member States' cultural promotion objectives, of
	 the non-commercial nature of the use made by the organisations in
	 question in order to achieve aims related to their public-interest
	 missions, such as promoting learning and disseminating culture, and of
	 the possible harm to rightholders.

(19) If a work or phonogram has been wrongly found to be an orphan work,
	 following a search which was not diligent, the remedies for copyright
	 infringement in Member States' legislation, provided for in accordance
	 with the relevant national provisions and Union law, remain available.

(20) In order to promote learning and the dissemination of culture, Member
	 States should provide for an exception or limitation in addition to those
	 provided for in Article 5 of Directive 2001/29/EC. That exception or
	 limitation should permit certain organisations, as referred to in point
	 (c) of Article 5(2) of Directive 2001/29/EC and film or audio heritage
	 institutions which operate on a non-profit making basis, as well as
	 public-service broadcasting organisations, to reproduce and make
	 available to the public, within the meaning of that Directive, orphan
	 works, provided that such use fulfils their public interest missions, in
	 particular the preservation of, the restoration of, and the provision of
	 cultural and educational access to, their collections, including their
	 digital collections. Film or audio heritage institutions should, for the
	 purposes of this Directive, cover organisations designated by Member
	 States to collect, catalogue, preserve and restore films and other
	 audiovisual works or phonograms forming part of their cultural heritage.
	 Public-service broadcasters should, for the purposes of this Directive,
	 cover broadcasters with a public-service remit as conferred, defined and
	 organised by each Member State. The exception or limitation established
	 by this Directive to permit the use of orphan works is without prejudice
	 to the exceptions and limitations provided for in Article 5 of Directive
	 2001/29/EC. It can be applied only in certain special cases which do not
	 conflict with the normal exploitation of the work or other protected
	 subject-matter and do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests
	 of the rightholder.

(21) In order to incentivise digitisation, the beneficiaries of this Directive
	 should be allowed to generate revenues in relation to their use of orphan
	 works under this Directive in order to achieve aims related to their
	 public-interest missions, including in the context of public-private
	 partnership agreements.

(22) Contractual arrangements may play a role in fostering the digitisation of
	 European cultural heritage, it being understood that publicly accessible
	 libraries, educational establishments and museums, as well as archives,
	 film or audio heritage institutions and public-service broad­ casting
	 organisations, should be allowed, with a view to undertaking the uses
	 permitted under this Directive, to conclude agreements with commercial
	 partners for the digitisation and making available to the public of
	 orphan works. Those agreements may include financial contributions by
	 such partners. Such agreements should not impose any restrictions on the
	 beneficiaries of this Directive as to their use of orphan works and
	 should not grant the commercial partner any rights to use, or control the
	 use of, the orphan works.

(23) In order to foster access by the Union's citizens to Europe's cultural
	 heritage, it is also necessary to ensure that orphan works which have
	 been digitised and made available to the public in one Member State may
	 also be made available to the public in other Member States. Publicly
	 accessible libraries, educational establishments and museums, as well as
	 archives, film or audio heritage institutions and public-service
	 broadcasting organisations that use an orphan work in order to achieve
	 their public-interest missions should be able to make the orphan work
	 available to the public in other Member States.

(24) This Directive is without prejudice to the arrangements in the Member
	 States concerning the management of rights such as extended collective
	 licences, legal presumptions of representation or transfer, collective
	 management or similar arrangements or a combination of them, including
	 for mass digitisation.

(25) Since the objective of this Directive, namely ensuring legal certainty 
	 with respect to the use of orphan works, cannot be sufficiently achieved
	 by the Member States and can therefore, by reason of the need for
	 uniformity of the rules governing the use of orphan works, be better
	 achieved at Union level, the Union may adopt measures, in accordance with
	 the principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty on
	 European Union. In accordance with the principle of proportionality, as
	 set out in that Article, this Directive does not go beyond what is
	 necessary in order to achieve that objective,

---- footnotes ---------------------------------------------------------------
(1) OJ C 376, 22.12.2011, p. 66.                                      
(2) Position of the European Parliament of 13 September 2012 (not yet
	published in the Official Journal) and decision of the Council of 4
	October 2012.                                                       
(3) OJ L 167, 22.6.2001, p. 10.
(4) Regulation (EU) No 386/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council
	of 19 April 2012 on entrusting the Office for Harmonization in the
	Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) with tasks related to the
	enforcement of intellectual property rights, including the assembling of
	public and private-sector representatives as a European Observatory on
	Infringements of Intellectual Property Rights (OJ L 129, 16.5.2012, p. 1).
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE:

Article 1

Subject-matter and scope

1.
This Directive concerns certain uses made of orphan works by publicly
accessible libraries, educational establishments and museums, as well as by
archives, film or audio heritage institutions and public-service broadcasting
organisations, established in the Member States, in order to achieve aims
related to their public-interest missions.

2.
This Directive applies to:

(a) works published in the form of books, journals, newspapers,
magazines or other writings contained in the collections of
publicly accessible libraries, educational establishments or
museums as well as in the collections of archives or of
film or audio heritage institutions;
(b) cinematographic or audiovisual works and phonograms
contained in the collections of publicly accessible libraries,
educational establishments or museums as well as in the
collections of archives or of film or audio heritage institu­
tions; and
(c) cinematographic or audiovisual works and phonograms
produced by public-service broadcasting organisations up
to and including 31 December 2002 and contained in
their archives;
which are protected by copyright or related rights and which
are first published in a Member State or, in the absence of
publication, first broadcast in a Member State.

3.
This Directive also applies to works and phonograms
referred to in paragraph 2 which have never been published
or broadcast but which have been made publicly accessible by
the organisations referred to in paragraph 1 with the consent of
the rightholders, provided that it is reasonable to assume that
the rightholders would not oppose the uses referred to in
Article 6. Member States may limit the application of this
paragraph to works and phonograms which have been
deposited with those organisations before 29 October 2014.

4.
This Directive shall also apply to works and other
protected subject-matter that are embedded or incorporated
in, or constitute an integral part of, the works or phonograms
referred to in paragraphs 2 and 3.

5.
This Directive does not interfere with any arrangements
concerning the management of rights at national level.

Article 2

Orphan works

1.
A work or a phonogram shall be considered an orphan
work if none of the rightholders in that work or phonogram is
identified or, even if one or more of them is identified, none is
located despite a diligent search for the rightholders having been
carried out and recorded in accordance with Article 3.

2.
Where there is more than one rightholder in a work or
phonogram, and not all of them have been identified or, even if
identified, located after a diligent search has been carried out
and recorded in accordance with Article 3, the work or
phonogram may be used in accordance with this Directive
provided that the rightholders that have been identified and
located have, in relation to the rights they hold, authorised
the organisations referred to in Article 1(1) to carry out the
acts of reproduction and making available to the public covered
respectively by Articles 2 and 3 of Directive 2001/29/EC.

3.
Paragraph 2 shall be without prejudice to the rights in the
work or phonogram of rightholders that have been identified
and located.

4.
Article 5 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the rightholders
that have not been identified and located in the works referred
to in paragraph 2.

5.
This Directive shall be without prejudice to national
provisions on anonymous or pseudonymous works.

Article 3

Diligent search

1.
For the purposes of establishing whether a work or
phonogram is an orphan work, the organisations referred to
in Article 1(1) shall ensure that a diligent search is carried
out in good faith in respect of each work or other protected
subject-matter, by consulting the appropriate sources for the
category of works and other protected subject-matter in
question. The diligent search shall be carried out prior to the
use of the work or phonogram.

2.
The sources that are appropriate for each category of
works or phonogram in question shall be determined by each
Member State, in consultation with rightholders and users, and
shall include at least the relevant sources listed in the Annex.

3.
A diligent search shall be carried out in the Member State
of first publication or, in the absence of publication, first
broadcast, except in the case of cinematographic or audiovisual
works the producer of which has his headquarters or habitual
residence in a Member State, in which case the diligent search
shall be carried out in the Member State of his headquarters or
habitual residence.

In the case referred to in Article 1(3), the diligent search shall be
carried out in the Member State where the organisation that
made the work or phonogram publicly accessible with the
consent of the rightholder is established.

4.
If there is evidence to suggest that relevant information on
rightholders is to be found in other countries, sources of
information available in those other countries shall also be
consulted.

5.
Member States shall ensure that the organisations referred
to in Article 1(1) maintain records of their diligent searches and
that those organisations provide the following information to
the competent national authorities:
(a) the results of the diligent searches that the organisations
have carried out and which have led to the conclusion
that a work or a phonogram is considered an orphan work;
(b) the use that the organisations make of orphan works in
accordance with this Directive;
(c) any change, pursuant to Article 5, of the orphan work
status of works and phonograms that the organisations use;
(d) the relevant contact information of the organisation
concerned.

6.
Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure
that the information referred to in paragraph 5 is recorded in a
single publicly accessible online database established and
managed by the Office for Harmonization in the Internal
Market ('the Office') in accordance with Regulation (EU) No
386/2012. To that end, they shall forward that information
to the Office without delay upon receiving it from the organi­
sations referred to in Article 1(1).

Article 4

Mutual recognition of orphan work status

A work or phonogram which is considered an orphan work
according to Article 2 in a Member State shall be considered an
orphan work in all Member States. That work or phonogram
may be used and accessed in accordance with this Directive in
all Member States. This also applies to works and phonograms
referred to in Article 2(2) in so far as the rights of the nonidentified or
non-located rightholders are concerned.

Article 5

End of orphan work status

Member States shall ensure that a rightholder in a work or
phonogram considered to be an orphan work has, at any
time, the possibility of putting an end to the orphan work
status in so far as his rights are concerned.

Article 6

Permitted uses of orphan works

1.
Member States shall provide for an exception or limitation
to the right of reproduction and the right of making available to
the public provided for respectively in Articles 2 and 3 of
Directive 2001/29/EC to ensure that the organisations referred
to in Article 1(1) are permitted to use orphan works contained
in their collections in the following ways:
(a) by making the orphan work available to the public, within
the meaning of Article 3 of Directive 2001/29/EC;
(b) by acts of reproduction, within the meaning of Article 2 of
Directive 2001/29/EC, for the purposes of digitisation,
making available, indexing, cataloguing, preservation or
restoration.

2.
The organisations referred to in Article 1(1) shall use an
orphan work in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article
only in order to achieve aims related to their public-interest
missions, in particular the preservation of, the restoration of,
and the provision of cultural and educational access to, works
and phonograms contained in their collection. The organi­
sations may generate revenues in the course of such uses, for
the exclusive purpose of covering their costs of digitising
orphan works and making them available to the public.

3.
Member States shall ensure that the organisations referred
to in Article 1(1) indicate the name of identified authors and
other rightholders in any use of an orphan work.

4.
This Directive is without prejudice to the freedom of
contract of such organisations in the pursuit of their public interest
missions, particularly in respect of public-private partnership agreements.

5.
Member States shall provide that a fair compensation is
due to rightholders that put an end to the orphan work status
of their works or other protected subject-matter for the use that
has been made by the organisations referred to in Article 1(1)
of such works and other protected subject-matter in accordance
with paragraph 1 of this Article. Member States shall be free to
determine the circumstances under which the payment of such
compensation may be organised. The level of the compensation
shall be determined, within the limits imposed by Union law, by
the law of the Member State in which the organisation which
uses the orphan work in question is established.

Article 7

Continued application of other legal provisions

This Directive shall be without prejudice to provisions
concerning, in particular, patent rights, trade marks, design
rights, utility models, the topographies of semi-conductor
products, type faces, conditional access, access to cable of
broadcasting services, the protection of national treasures,
legal deposit requirements, laws on restrictive practices and
unfair competition, trade secrets, security, confidentiality, data
protection and privacy, access to public documents, the law of
contract, and rules on the freedom of the press and freedom of
expression in the media.

Article 8

Application in time

1.
This Directive shall apply in respect of all works and
phonograms referred to in Article 1 which are protected by
the Member States' legislation in the field of copyright on or
after 29 October 2014.

2.
This Directive shall apply without prejudice to any acts
concluded and rights acquired before 29 October 2014.


Article 9

Transposition

1.
Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations
and administrative provisions necessary to comply with this
Directive by 29 October 2014. They shall forthwith
communicate to the Commission the text of those provisions.

When Member States adopt those provisions, they shall contain  
a reference to this Directive or shall be accompanied by such a     
reference on the occasion of their official publication. The    
methods of making such reference shall be laid down by       
Member States.

2.
Member States shall communicate to the Commission the
text of the main provisions of national law which they adopt in
the field covered by this Directive.

Article 10

Review clause

The Commission shall keep under constant review the devel­
opment of rights information sources and shall by 29 October
2015, and at annual intervals thereafter, submit a report
concerning the possible inclusion in the scope of application
of this Directive of publishers and of works or other protected
subject-matter not currently included in its scope, and in
particular stand-alone photographs and other images.

By 29 October 2015, the Commission shall submit to the
European Parliament, the Council and the European Economic
and Social Committee a report on the application of this
Directive, in the light of the development of digital libraries.

When necessary, in particular to ensure the functioning of the
internal market, the Commission shall submit proposals for
amendment of this Directive.

A Member State that has valid reasons to consider that the
implementation of this Directive hinders one of the national
arrangements concerning the management of rights referred
to in Article 1(5) may bring the matter to the attention of
the Commission together with all relevant evidence. The
Commission shall take such evidence into account when
drawing up the report referred to in the second paragraph of
this Article and when assessing whether it is necessary to
submit proposals for amendment of this Directive.

Article 11

Entry into force

This Directive shall enter into force on the day following that of
its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union.

Article 12

Addressees

This Directive is addressed to the Member States.


Done at Strasbourg, 25 October 2012.

For the European Parliament
The President
M. SCHULZ

For the Council
The President
A. D. MAVROYIANNIS


ANNEX
The sources referred to in Article 3(2) include the following:
(1) for published books:
	(a) legal deposit, library catalogues and authority files maintained by
		libraries and other institutions;
    (b) the publishers' and authors' associations in the respective country;
	(c) existing databases and registries, WATCH (Writers, Artists and their
		Copyright Holders), the ISBN (International Standard Book Number) and
		databases listing books in print;
	(d) the databases of the relevant collecting societies, in particular
		reproduction rights organisations;
	(e) sources that integrate multiple databases and registries, including
		VIAF (Virtual International Authority Files) and ARROW (Accessible
		Registries of Rights Information and Orphan Works);
(2) for newspapers, magazines, journals and periodicals:
	(a) the ISSN (International Standard Serial Number) for periodical
        publications;
    (b) indexes and catalogues from library holdings and collections;
    (c) legal deposit;
	(d) the publishers' associations and the authors' and journalists'
        associations in the respective country;
	(e) the databases of relevant collecting societies including reproduction
        rights organisations;
(3) for visual works, including fine art, photography, illustration, design,
	architecture, sketches of the latter works and other such works that are
	contained in books, journals, newspapers and magazines or other works:
    (a) the sources referred to in points (1) and (2);
	(b) the databases of the relevant collecting societies, in particular for
	    visual arts, and including reproduction rights organisations;
    (c) the databases of picture agencies, where applicable;
(4) for audiovisual works and phonograms:
	(a) legal deposit;
	(b) the producers' associations in the respective country;
	(c) databases of film or audio heritage institutions and national
	    libraries;
	(d) databases with relevant standards and identifiers such as ISAN
		(International Standard Audiovisual Number) for audiovisual material,
		ISWC (International Standard Music Work Code) for musical works and
		ISRC (International Standard Recording Code) for phonograms;
	(e) the databases of the relevant collecting societies, in particular for
		authors, performers, phonogram producers and audiovisual producers;
    (f) credits and other information appearing on the work's packaging;
	(g) databases of other relevant associations representing a specific
	    category of rightholders.
